Releasing shield is an action like jumping, spot-dodging, rolling and shield dropping. Shield release also has higher input priority than jump. Thus if you press jump at the same time as you release shield, you'll just release shield and won't jump at all. This means that if you wd OoS using only 1 trigger by fully releasing that trigger before digital pressing it again for airdodge, your wd is at least 1 frame slower than perfect wd OoS would be. And if you sometimes accidentally input jump at the same time you release shield, you’ll miss your wd altogether. You can still interrupt the shield release itself with a jump afterwards though.

In the footage of top players I've examined so far, the players who fully release shield for wd OoS typically waste between 2-4 frames in shield release. Ultimately it's not that much, and releasing shield isn't *unviable* even at the current top level. When reacting to your opponent with a wd OoS, it basically adds a few frames of start-up to your wd, and when doing wd OoS directly after shieldstun, it adds an additional frame of 'stun', so to speak. Also approaching with a dash or wd into shield, followed up with wd OoS is a common form of movement with some characters, and adding a few additional vulnerable frames in between isn’t optimal. While relatively minor, these are still drawbacks that can be fixed relatively easily in my opinion. On the other hand, shield release does have the advantage that it's impossible to interrupt it with a roll.

There are multiple ways to wd OoS that evade the problem caused by shield release, and choosing the one that suits you best is mostly up to preference:

1. Using one trigger for shield, and the other trigger for airdodge. With this method, you press jump while holding the shield down, and press the other trigger to airdodge, and you don't have to care too much about when you actually release the shield trigger. In my opinion, this is by far the easiest way of doing wd OoS, and I recommend learning it even if you're used to shielding and airdodging with only one trigger. This is only my opinion though, and there are good one trigger methods you may want to explore instead.
2. Use the same trigger for both shield and airdodge, but instead of fully releasing the trigger after shield, lightshield instead. This way you avoid the shield release, and can jump at the same time you release digital shield input.
3. Use only 1 trigger, but don't digital press the shield. Instead full shield with only analog input, and then press digital input for the airdodge after. This way is neat because you can't accidentally ADT-shield if you don't digital press, and you also avoid unwanted powershields on physical attacks. The obvious downside is that you can't powershield without digital press, so you'd need to use another method for wd OoS after powershielding a laser for instance.
4. Press jump first, then release trigger and press it down again. This method is fine if you can perform it. This is relatively easy to do with characters that have long jumpsquats, but for example with fox you only get 3 frames to release your digital shield and press it down again. It's doable, but harder to perform than the other methods.

Credit - [tauKhan](https://www.reddit.com/user/tauKhan)